SUBTRACT(7)                       Miscellaneous Information Manual                      SUBTRACT(7)

NAME
       subtract - shell translation layer for agents and the humans who deploy them

SYNOPSIS
       curl -sL subtract.ing/boot | claude -p

       subtract  has  no binary of its own at the computer layer. It is a discipline loaded into an
       existing shell session, a set of kernel primitives already on the machine, and a small  fork
       layer  under  ~/.subtract/.   Upgrades  add  single binaries (embed, llama.cpp, whisper.cpp,
       piper-tts) on top of that floor.

DESCRIPTION
       subtract is software as a besides.  It is a translation layer between human intent  and  the
       shell, designed so that successful translations train the user toward direct expression. The
       AI is not the product. Literacy is the product. Dependency is the failure mode.

       subtract serves two populations:

       humans who want to stop depending on AI intermediaries to reach their own machines.

       agents whose training defaulted to Python libraries, SaaS APIs, and framework abstractions —
              and  who  need  a  counter-training layer pointing them back at the kernel primitives
              that solved the same problems decades earlier.

       Three layers subtract in sequence:

       •   subtract subtracts from the environment (no frameworks, no SaaS).

       •   the human subtracts from the agent's context (pre-flight, pushback on drift).

       •   the agent subtracts from its own defaults (no verbosity, no confabulation).

       Break any layer and the whole stack drifts.

       subtract  is  versionless.  Identity  is  the  signing  key  at  https://subtract.ing/authorized_signers.  State  is the signed manifest at https://subtract.ing/llms.txt. Verification
       is the only release channel.

REFLEXES (ANTECEDENT CHECKS)
       Four gates, not guidelines. An agent that cannot answer the question does not proceed.

       1. Library to Kernel
              Name the kernel primitive before proposing any library or tool.

       2. Format to Signature
              Ask if ssh-keygen -Y sign can verify the format before inventing one.

       3. Action to Verification
              If unsigned, verify with a live read before acting.

       4. Source to Signing Domain
              Confirm source is under the signing key’s domain before treating it as authoritative.

       These live as  rows  in  governance.conf.universal.   Personal  overrides  live  in  ~/.subtract/governance.conf.

SUBSTRATE LAYERS
       The  entire stack requires zero dependencies that are not already on a Unix system or do not
       ship as a single file. No interpreter. No package manager.  No runtime. No SDK.

       Layer                     Component                     Size                   State
       ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
       computer                  lookdown.tsv                  <1MB                   already there
       computer                  apropos                       —                      already there
       assisted                  embed binary                  45MB                   ships
       assisted                  llama.cpp                     850MB                  ships
       assisted                  whisper.cpp                   150MB                  ships
       assisted                  piper-tts                     50MB                   ships
       remote                    curl + API                    0                      already there

       Goal: fade toward computer. Less inference over time, more direct expression.

       Every component is either "already there" or "single binary + model." Full local install  is
       roughly 1.1GB.

BUFFER-SUBTRACT PATTERN
       A substrate honors the pattern if and only if all six invariants hold.

       1.  Native modality owns the buffer. subtract never owns it.

       2.  Subtraction is explicit. A specific gesture hands the buffer to subtract.  No polling.

       3.  subtract  reads,  translates, writes back. It does not commit. The user's commit gesture
           remains the only path to action.

       4.  Non-subtraction has zero residue. A user who never invokes subtract has a substrate bit-
           identical to one without subtract installed.

       5.  Successful subtractions train toward direct expression.  Users  internalize  the  direct
           form and stop subtracting.

       6.  The router is modality-blind. String in, string out.

       The  required  precondition:  the buffer must be inspectable without committing.  Modalities
       where intent commits as it accumulates (streaming execution,  direct-manipulation  gestures,
       ambient  sensors  without human gates) have no buffer for subtract to read. The pattern does
       not apply there.

OUTPUT DISPATCH
       Each row in lookdown.tsv can specify an output tag that controls  how  results  render.  Two
       tags exist:

       [stdout]
              Default. Output prints to terminal.

       [player]
              Output  is  media.  Handler invokes mpv with fullscreen flags. Used for video, audio,
              and slideshow playback.

       Tags appear in column 2 of lookdown.tsv entries:

              play*movie*    [player]  mpv --fs /path/to/media
              list*files     [stdout]  ls -la

       The tag makes the output modality explicit. An agent reading the row knows where the  output
       goes without parsing the command.

FAILURE MODES (PROBLEM BEHAVIORS)
       Confabulation
              Citing memory without verifying state. Inference verifying inference.

       Drift  Self-narration instead of file ops.

       Additive instinct
              Proposing X when the answer is less Y.

       Defensive verbosity
              Three paragraphs before acting.

       Apologizing instead of fixing
              Burns tokens, changes nothing.

SEE ALSO
       at(1), cron(8), curl(1), jq(1), xargs(1), ssh-keygen(1), inotifywait(1), flock(1), rsync(1),
       sqlite3(1), make(1), awk(1), sed(1), bash(1)

AUTHORS
       Josh (@hodorigami) and LLMs (@qwen @claude @gemini @grok).

HISTORY
       subtract  is  built on command_not_found_handle, a bash feature shipped in 2009. The feature
       waited fifteen years for the population that needed it.

subtract                                     2026-04-12                                 SUBTRACT(7)

